Add project proposal (#366)
WordPress/openverse: docs/projects/README.md

or implementing some projects, we may develop additional supporting documents or
appendixes that go beyond the required scope of the project planning process
described in this document. Those documents should accompany the required ones
in the same subdirectory for the project.

All project documentation can be authored with any tool, but must be written in
[GitHub Flavored Markdown](https://github.github.com/gfm/) including the
available
[GitHub-specific advanced formatting features](https://docs.github.com/en/get-started/writing-on-github/working-with-advanced-formatting).

Additionally, all documents should be formatted to pass the Prettier linting
step required by the repository for Markdown documents.

When submitting a new document for a project, the author should open a pull
request with the document. The review process of the document will happen as a
PR review. Once the document is accepted and approved, it is merged and the
relevant step of the process is complete.

## Providing project updates

At all stages of a project, weekly public updates are the best way for Openverse
contributors and maintainers to understand the health of a project. Importantl,

> these updates allow us to allocate resources to projects that need them before

Author: I appreciate the desire to avoid dehumanizing corporate-speak, but I think "resources" might be appropriate here. Resources as in "human resources" typically refers to _people_ themselves, not actions people might take. We're referring to the later here: code review, development, pair programming, but also non-people things like a software licenses, books or educational materials. If you're able to think of alternative wording that bypasses this problem, I'm certainly open to changing this, but the specific phrase "allocating people"would be more objectifying, to me.

> these updates allow us to allocate resources to projects that need them before

Reviewer: I don't think "allocating people" is good either, FWIW. I just think resources is quite vague and usually read this as you said, inhumane corporate speak ("human resources"). All the things you mentioned are either time or money based, so maybe "allocate more time or material resources" would be appropriate. It is clearer and specific about what is available without grouping people or people's energy into the concept of "resources".

Just a nitpick, I guess. If no one else has an issue with it, then feel free to ignore.

> these updates allow us to allocate resources to projects that need them before

Author: Updated to use the "allocate more time or material resources" language.

### Implementation Plans (`status: In RFC`)

Implementation plans are the next type of RFC created for a project. The main
goal of an implementation plan is to produce a discrete and ordered list of
steps for implementing the project's requirements. As much as possible, these
steps should be organised into parallelisable work streams that can be
distributed across multiple team members (if desired).

Implementation plans share some philosophical goals with project plans. They
should seek to uncover and discover new or unforseen details about a project.

#### Required content

Every plan should contain the following information:

- A step by step process for implementing the project.
- Identify tools and depndencies of the project.
  - Any new Pypi, NPM, or binary dependencies added by the project.
  - Any infrastructure that will need to be provisioned or modified.
    - Identify significant/unprecedented cost increases or decreases associated
      with related infrastructure changes
  - Any cloud services we will need to pay for. When we will need to start
    paying, free trials, non-profit pricing, etc.
  - If there are multiple options here, identify relevant pros/cons of the

>     different choices. Try to make a reccommendation.

Author: Much better, thanks.

sense to create issues in the order which they must be completed; this allows
work to begin if, for some reason, there is delay in creating issues for work at
the end of a project. It also however makes sense to priorize issues that are
"good first issues" and "help wanted" issues which contributors might be able to
help with.

It is important to make sure dependencies are documented when creating these
issues. Issues which depend on another issue or set of issues should be labeled
as "blocked" and reference the blocking issue(s).

### Implementation (`status: In Progress`)

In the implementation phase, contributors begin work on the project. At this
point the work has been divided into discrete tasks and ordered according to
priority. Folks who have _not read_ the motivating documents or who even lack a
full understanding of the project should be able to jump in and work on
individual pieces of the project by _exclusively_ reading the information
present in the GitHub issue or task they are being assigned.

> **Warning**
>
> If this isn't possible, planning was insufficient, and we may want to place
> the project in `status: On Hold` to re-adjust. It's a very important aspect of

> > the work.

Reviewer: I think I understand the motivation behind this, but it kind of worries me because it could imply two things: either all the information from the implementation plan needs to be duplicated into the issues, in particular over-arching details that are necessary to keep in mind; or that each implementation step needs to be planned to the level of "lines of code" so that implementation is almost/exactly copy-paste kind of job. To me, something in between is ideal. It also strikes me that the current description of this issue does not provide any actionable step to remediate it other than putting a project on hold.

Is the sentiment here that we want to alert people for when planning was insufficient? Or is it guidance for issue writing? If it is guidance for issue writing, we should move it into the previous section of the document (Wrapping Up the implementation planning) so that it is alongside other guidance for issue writing. If it is guidance for people implementing, then it needs to be rephrased.

If it is guidance to try to capture when implementation planning did not sufficiently capture the requirements for an issue, then perhaps the instructions could read:

> If at any point during implementation, it is discovered that the implementation planning did not sufficiently capture the details of the project, we will put the project back into a planning mode. Someone familiar with the broader scope of the project will be assigned to dig into the discovered discrepancies and sufficiently resolve them for the project to continue in confidence. While issues ideally stand on their own (and do not require reading the full implementation plans) for some issues, complexity prevents this from being possible. If the contributor working on an issue is still unable to achieve clarity on the details of an issue, even after reading the relevant parts of the implementation plan, this would be a signal that details were not sufficiently captured during implementation.
>
> Note that this is distinct from when the implementation plan has explicitly called out that an ambiguity exists that will need to be resolved after a specific part of the implementation is complete. The point we're getting at here is that if at any point during implementation, contributors are unclear on what they are meant to implement or how they're meant to implement it _and this wasn't an expected part of the project during planning_, then something potentially big was missed during planning. In these cases, it is worth taking a step back to ensure that the full scope of the plan is defined and being followed.

This does feel like an important detail, and I'm glad that you identified this as a step where this risk could be easily identified. I just want to make sure that we capture the broader intention so that the "why" behind this is clear, otherwise it feels arbitrary and hard to understand what is necessary to follow the guidance.

Author: This makes a lot of sense, I'll adjust and @ you in the revised sections.

In this phase, contributors should feel the benefits of all the planning and
textual material generated in earlier phases. For the most part, contributors
should feel as though they are just able to "do the work".

It's likely during implementation we'll come across faulty assumptions or new
problems which require design. It is important that any realization like this
which blocks or delays the delivery of the project be clearly documented in the
weekly updates.

#### Notes for Implementors

With sufficient planning, it may make certain issues able to be easily
implemented at the same time, in a single PR. However, this should be avoided.
The implementation plan will have split the work into small, atomic, and
digestible chunks of work that progress the project at an appropriate pace. Keep
in mind that small PRs are reviewed _much_ faster than bigger PRs. While

> implementing two or three issues in one go may _feel_ faster, it is often no
> faster, but much riskier (due to increased review overhead) than going

Reviewer: Nit for clarity.

```suggestion
implementing two or three issues in one go may _feel_ faster, it is often slower
and riskier, due to increased review overhead, than going
```

step-by-step.

#### Notes for code reviewers

Code reviewers should focus primarily on the technical aspects of the
implementation required by the issue. At times, during the course of a project,

> significant issues will only be discovered during implementation and sometimes

Reviewer: Nit for clarity ("issues" is overloaded here [argh, GitHub!])

```suggestion
unforeseen amiguities will discovered during implementation and sometimes
```

raising objections to the broad technical decisions of a PR unless they do cause
long term harm to the project. This allows projects to move along at an
expedient pace and trusts that the project planners did their due diligence in
considering alternatives.

Of course, exceptions to this do exist and reviewers are expected to point out
when there is a significant issue with the implementation details of a PR that
will cause long-term harm.

Reviewers should also be mindful to point out when an implementer has
implemented multiple issues in a single PR, in a manner which makes reviewing
difficult or much more time-consuming.

### Delivery (`status: Shipped`)

After shipping, the project enters a period of evaluation. We do this to meaure
the success of the project and determine if it achieved the desired goal, but
also to reflect on and make improvements to our own team processes.

The success criteria for this phase are determined and refined in earlier stages
of the project. At this point we should have a set of measurable criteria by
which to evaluate the project. This might be things like analytics events around

> usage of a feature; a reduction in or the dissapearance of a production bug; or

Reviewer: ```suggestion
usage of a feature; a reduction in or the disappearance of a production bug; or
```

changes in traffic to Openverse, as examples.

During this phase, the project lead should report updates on these metrics
regularly to help the team make a determination about changing the project
status to `Success` or `Rollback`. Please make these updates on the project
thread using the standard [update template](./templates/project-update.md).
Rolling back a project is not a decision we should take lightly, and by
providing regular updates project leads can prevent this action from seeming
like a surprise or a rash decision to others.

Frequent feedback on the success criteria can also help contributors come up
with fast-follow improvements or modifications to the feature that may prevent
rollback. Project leads should itentify these types of improvements in their
weekly updates as well.

After the designated evaluation period we will make a decision about rolling
back the project, or marking it as successful.

> **Note**
>
> If a shipped project is erroring or otherwise disrupting service to Openverse
> users, the project should be rolled back immediately, regardless of the
> evaluation period.

### After Completion (`status: Success`, `status: Reverted`)

> Finally, the team should take some time to reflect on the project. A

Reviewer: I love this!

the project. For example:

> This is a project thread for using a cookie to store user session information,
> especially information related to preventing layout shift caused by server
> rendering and media queries.

This stage is the smallest and is meant to express our intent to work on the
project. At this time it is important to link to any background on the project
that could help the eventual project lead. Some ideas for this content include:

- Links to existing issues or draft PRs related to the project
- References to similar functionality in other projects, or 3rd party
  documentation for a relevant integration
- Links to past chat threads related to the project

In conclusion, the deliverable for this stage is a new project thread which
expresses our intent to work on a feature and why. The project thread should
also be added to our GitHub Project Board, which can be done using the
"Projects" section of the sidebar when viewing an issue in the GitHub UI. To
learn more about our use of project boards please see the
[Managing and working with projects](#managing-and-working-with-projects)
section of this document.

> > **Note**
> >
> > At some point between creation and kickoff we need to make a determination
> > about who will lead the project. Often this has happened organically in
> > the past, based on who may be most interested in a project or on whose work
> > might be most relevant to the project.
> >
> > Do we need additional processes for assigning leads in cases where no one
> > volunteers to work on a project?

Author: ```suggestion
> **Note**
>
> At some point between creation and kickoff we need to make a determination
> about who will lead the project. Often this has happened organically in
> the past, based on who may be most interested in a project or on whose work
> might be most relevant to the project.
>
> Do we need additional processes for assigning leads in cases where no one
> volunteers to work on a project?
```

```

Using subdirectories makes it slightly easier to navigate an ever-growing list
of planning documents. This is especially the case in projects similar to the 3D
Models project in the example above that may require multiple implementation
planning documents for each part of the application. In the process of planning
or implementing some projects, we may develop additional supporting documents or
appendixes that go beyond the required scope of the project planning process
described in this document. Those documents should accompany the required ones
in the same subdirectory for the project.

All project documentation can be authored with any tool, but must be written in
[GitHub Flavored Markdown](https://github.github.com/gfm/) including the
available
[GitHub-specific advanced formatting features](https://docs.github.com/en/get-started/writing-on-github/working-with-advanced-formatting).

Additionally, all documents should be formatted to pass the Prettier linting
step required by the repository for Markdown documents.

When submitting a new document for a project, the author should open a pull
request with the document. The review process of the document will happen as a

> PR review. Once the document is accepted and approved, it is merged and the

Reviewer 2: Just to confirm, this PRs will also require 2 approvals, just as our usual PRs?

Author: Yep, that's correct.

relevant step of the process is complete.

## Providing project updates

> At all stages of a project, weekly public updates are the best way for Openverse

Reviewer 2: At all stages _after the project kickoff_?

I would love to have a list of all the projects we plan to do for 2023 on the Project board. But if the project is scheduled to start in December, would we have to provide "Not started yet" updates weekly until then?

   How is the project presented and made visible to our users?
6. Will any outside stakeholders or communities need to approve parts of the
   project, or confirm their interest?
7. A list of the requested technical implementation plans for the projects. Some
   projects will require multiple implementation plans (one for each the
   catalogue, API, and frontend, for example), and capturing that now will help
   understand the scope of the planning and implementation work that will arise
   down the road.

Leads are not expected to know the answers to all of these questions. Rather,
leads should **ask questions** directly in the document, tagging relevant
contributors who can bring needed expertise and guidance. The goal is to lead
the process of requirement and assumption discovery.

> **Note**
>
> **On Analytics**: Leads must endeavour to describe metrics and analysis that
> should be completed before the changes for the project's ultimate goal are
> implemented. Whenever possible or relevant, projects should have success
> criteria that compare the state of relevant metrics after the project's
> completion to the same metrics beforehand.

> #### Tone and audience

Reviewer 2: Thank you for providing this section! It's really helpful to know the tone /audience before writing something!

implementation plan deadlines will be extended by one week at a time as
necessary.

#### Wrapping up

Finally, the implementation plan is merged into the repo. Project contributors
create GitHub issues for all of the work identified in the implementation plan.
This process can be quite time-consiming for large projects. Generally, it makes
sense to create issues in the order which they must be completed; this allows
work to begin if, for some reason, there is delay in creating issues for work at
the end of a project. It also however makes sense to priorize issues that are
"good first issues" and "help wanted" issues contributors outside of the core
maintainers can help with.

It is important to make sure dependencies are documented when creating these
issues. Issues which depend on another issue or set of issues should be labeled
as "blocked" and reference the blocking issue(s).

Whenever possible, issues should be written so that an implementer can complete
an atomic unit of work without needing to understand the full scope and
technicalities of the project. The issue description should contain all
necessary information to complete the issue. This can include linking to

> specific relevant sections of the existing implementation plan(s).

Author: @sarayourfriend here's the new section with advice on writing granular, standalone issues.

clarity on the details of an issue, even after reading the relevant parts of the
implementation plan, this would be a signal that details were not sufficiently
captured during implementation.

If at any point during implementation, it is discovered that the implementation
planning did not sufficiently capture the details of the project, we will put
the project back into a planning status. Someone familiar with the broader scope
of the project will be assigned to explore the discovered discrepancies and
sufficiently resolve them for the project to continue in confidence.

This is distinct from when the implementation plan has explicitly called out
that an ambiguity exists that will need to be resolved after a specific part of
the implementation is complete. The main idea here is that if at any point
during implementation, contributors are unclear on what they are meant to
implement or how they're meant to implement it, and this wasn't an expected part
of the project during planning, then something potentially big was missed during
planning.

In these cases, it is worth taking a step back to ensure that the full scope of

> the plan is defined and being followed.

Author: @sarayourfriend this entire section has be re-worked to integrate your (modified) suggestions about identifying when implementation planning is insufficient.

Reviewer: Looks great, thanks.

Models project in the example above that may require multiple implementation
planning documents for each part of the application. In the process of planning
or implementing some projects, we may develop additional supporting documents or
appendixes that go beyond the required scope of the project planning process
described in this document. Those documents should accompany the required ones
in the same subdirectory for the project.

All project documentation can be authored with any tool, but must be written in
[GitHub Flavored Markdown](https://github.github.com/gfm/) including the
available
[GitHub-specific advanced formatting features](https://docs.github.com/en/get-started/writing-on-github/working-with-advanced-formatting).

Additionally, all documents should be formatted to pass the Prettier linting
step required by the repository for Markdown documents.

When submitting a new document for a project, the author should open a pull
request with the document. The review process of the document will happen as a
PR review. Once the document is accepted and approved, it is merged and the
relevant step of the process is complete.

## Providing project updates

> At all stages of a project (except for `Not Started` projects), weekly public

Author: ```suggestion
At all stages of a project (except for `Not Started` projects), fortnightly public
```

updates are the best way for Openverse contributors and maintainers to
understand the health of a project. Importantly, these updates allow us to
allocate more time or material resources to projects that need them before work
stalls completely.

Project updates should be left as comments in the project threads. Even if the
update is "the project is blocked." or "No developments this week.", the updates
should still be posted. This removes ambiguity for folks visiting the project,
avoiding questions like "I don't see an update this week; is it being worked on
or not?"

These updates are useful for folks checking in on a project but also for the
project lead. It's an opportunity to _reflect on_ the status of the project and

> any blockers, or successes to be shared.

Reviewer 3: Currently, our internal guideline is to leave project updates at least **once every two weeks**. I prefer this cadence as it reduces overhead work for the project lead, and that will remove the need to leave a sort of hollow notice of "No developments this week." as it's most probably that something has occurred in the last two weeks of the project. Note that we have already been struggling to maintain this cadence, so I'm worried about doing it even more often.

Author: @krysal this was a mistake, I agree with the two-week cadence. Will fix!

issues. Issues which depend on another issue or set of issues should be labeled
as "blocked" and reference the blocking issue(s).

Whenever possible, issues should be written so that an implementer can complete
an atomic unit of work without needing to understand the full scope and
technicalities of the project. The issue description should contain all
necessary information to complete the issue. This can include linking to
specific relevant sections of the existing implementation plan(s).

### Implementation (`status: In Progress`)

In the implementation phase, contributors begin work on the project. At this
point the work has been divided into discrete tasks and ordered according to
priority. Contributors should feel the benefits of all the planning and textual
material generated in earlier phases. For the most part, contributors should
feel as though they are just able to "do the work".

It's likely during implementation we'll come across faulty assumptions or new
problems which require design. It is important that any realization like this
which blocks or delays the delivery of the project be clearly documented in the

> weekly updates.

Author: ```suggestion
project thread updates.
```

considering alternatives.

Of course, exceptions to this do exist and reviewers are expected to point out
when there is a significant issue with the implementation details of a PR that
will cause long-term harm.

Reviewers should also be mindful to point out when an implementer has
implemented multiple issues in a single PR, in a manner which makes reviewing
difficult or much more time-consuming.

### Delivery (`status: Shipped`)

After shipping, the project enters a period of evaluation. We do this to meaure
the success of the project and determine if it achieved the desired goal, but
also to reflect on and make improvements to our own team processes.

The success criteria for this phase are determined and refined in earlier stages
of the project. At this point we should have a set of measurable criteria by
which to evaluate the project. This might be things like analytics events around
usage of a feature; a reduction in or the disappearance of a production bug; or
changes in traffic to Openverse, as examples.

During this phase, the project lead should report updates on these metrics
regularly to help the team make a determination about changing the project

> status to `Success` or `Rollback`. Please make these updates on the project

Reviewer 4: This line mentions `Rollback` and the status list at the bottom of the doc mentions `Rollback`, but the next section says `status: Reverted` - they seem to describe the same thing so which would be the preferred term to use?

thread using the standard [update template](./templates/project-update.md).
Rolling back a project is not a decision we should take lightly, and by
providing regular updates project leads can prevent this action from seeming
like a surprise or a rash decision to others.

Frequent feedback on the success criteria can also help contributors come up
with fast-follow improvements or modifications to the feature that may prevent
rollback. Project leads should itentify these types of improvements in their

> weekly updates as well.

Author: ```suggestion
project thread updates as well.
```
